tutorials/solids/hyperelasticity/cylinderCrush/README.md, before:

---
sort: 3
---

# Tutorial: `cylinderCrush`

---

## Tutorial Aims

- Exemplify the use of a hyperelastic mechanical law with large deformations
  and a solid contact boundary condition.
- Compare the convergence behavior of updated and total Lagrangian formulations.


## Case overview

<img src="images/cylinder-crushed.png" width="400" />

**Figure 1: Solid cylinder compressed between two rigid plates**

The third benchmark is a solid cylinder made of a rubbery material crushed
between two rigid plates, as schematically shown in Figure 1. The cylinder has
a diameter of *0.4 m* and is compressed between rigid plates with a total
compressed displacement of half its diameter. The contact between the cylinder
and plate surfaces was modeled as frictionless (see the `solidContact` boundary
condition setup in the `0/DD` file).

This problem was investigated by [[1] T. Sussman and K.-J. Bathe, “A finite
element formulation for nonlinear incompresible elastic and inelastic
analysis,” Computers and Structures, vol. 26, pp. 357–409, 1987.
](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0045794987902653), which
assumed a nearly-incompressible behavior of the material, and also by [I.
Bijelonja, I. Demirdžić, and S. Muzaferija, “A finite volume method for large
strain analysis of incompressible hyperelastic materials,” International
Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, vol.  64, pp. 1594–1609, Nov.
2005](https://hrcak.srce.hr/206941), which modeled the material of the cylinder
as purely incompressible. In the tutorial, the same material law employed by
both studies was used: the Mooney-Rivlin law with *c<sub>10</sub> = 0.293 MPa*,
*c<sub>01</sub> = 0.177 MPa*, and the bulk modulus *1410 MPa*. Note that this
material is much less stiff than the material assumed in the previous two
tutorials.

The domain used was only a quarter of the cylinder due to symmetry (hatched
area in Figure 1). A mesh with 500 quadrilateral control volumes arranged in a
block-structured mesh was simulated and the updated Lagrangian approach was
employed for the results shown below, indicated by the `solidModel`
`nonLinearGeometryUpdatedLagrangian`. The plate is linearly displaced in 30
increments.

---

## Expected results

Figure 2 shows the displacement of the mesh of the (a) undeformed
configuration, and an intermediate and final instants of the simulation (b and
c, respectively). Figure 3 shows the Von Mises stress field for the
intermediate and final configuration of the cylinder, where we can see that the
maximum stress occurs at the center of cylinder.

<img src="images/mesh-1.png" width="300" />
<img src="images/mesh-2.png" width="300" />
<img src="images/mesh-3.png" width="300" />

**Figure 2: Mesh of the undeformed configuration and the deformed mesh at a
intermediate and final instants of time.**

<img src="images/stress-2.png" width="400" />
<img src="images/stress-3.png" width="400" />

**Figure 3: Von Mises stress fields at the intermediate and final instants of
time.**

The verification of the solution given by `solids4Foam` can be seen in the
Figure 4 which shows the displacement force applied to the cylinder as a
function of the plate vertical displacement. The plot compares the numerical
solution by using the FEM solution provided by Bijelonja et al. (2005).

<img src="images/displacement-force.png" width="400" />

**Figure 4: Displacement force versus deflection of the cylinder with
`solid4Foam` and a reference solution using the FEM method published in
[Bijelonja et al. (2005)](https://hrcak.srce.hr/206941).**

Note from Figures 2 and 3 that the deformation of this case is quite large,
with the mesh being considerably deformed towards the later time-steps. It is
instructive in this tutorial to assess the impact of the updated and total
Lagrangian formulations on the convergence of the case. To that end, we first
ran this tutorial with the `nonLinearGeometryUpdatedLagrangian` (label UL) and,
then, `nonLinearGeometryTotalLagrangianTotalDisplacement` (labeled TLTD) and
`nonLinearGeometryTotalLagrangian` (label TL) that uses the total Lagrangian
formulation but with the total and incremental displacements, respectively. The
comparison is shown in Figure 5 with the residuals of the second and
last time-steps.

<img src="images/residuals-plot-dt2.png" width="400" />
<img src="images/residuals-plot-last-dt.png" width="400" />

 **Figure 5: Residuals of this tutorial using an updated and total Lagrangian
 approaches at the second (left panel) and last (right panel) time-steps.**

Note that there is a change in the best approach according to the instant in
time, although the total time of simulation was approximately the same. This
may also occur depending on the problem you simulating, so it might be
important to perform different tests with the problem you are handling to find
the optimal `solidModel`.

---

## Data Availability

The results and gnuplot scripts used to generate the figures above are
available in the [solids4foam tutorials benchmark
data](https://github.com/solids4foam/solids4foam-tutorials-benchmark-data)
repository.

Commit message:

Added warning in README.md of cylinderCrush and cylindricalPressureVessel tutorials that they only work with foam-extend currently.

tutorials/solids/hyperelasticity/cylinderCrush/README.md, after:

---
sort: 3
---

# Tutorial: `cylinderCrush`

---

## Tutorial Aims

- Exemplify the use of a hyperelastic mechanical law with large deformations
  and a solid contact boundary condition.
- Compare the convergence behavior of updated and total Lagrangian formulations.

```warning
This tutorial currently only works with foam-extend-4.1.
```

## Case overview

<img src="images/cylinder-crushed.png" width="400" />

**Figure 1: Solid cylinder compressed between two rigid plates**

The third benchmark is a solid cylinder made of a rubbery material crushed
between two rigid plates, as schematically shown in Figure 1. The cylinder has
a diameter of *0.4 m* and is compressed between rigid plates with a total
compressed displacement of half its diameter. The contact between the cylinder
and plate surfaces was modeled as frictionless (see the `solidContact` boundary
condition setup in the `0/DD` file).

This problem was investigated by [[1] T. Sussman and K.-J. Bathe, “A finite
element formulation for nonlinear incompresible elastic and inelastic
analysis,” Computers and Structures, vol. 26, pp. 357–409, 1987.
](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0045794987902653), which
assumed a nearly-incompressible behavior of the material, and also by [I.
Bijelonja, I. Demirdžić, and S. Muzaferija, “A finite volume method for large
strain analysis of incompressible hyperelastic materials,” International
Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, vol.  64, pp. 1594–1609, Nov.
2005](https://hrcak.srce.hr/206941), which modeled the material of the cylinder
as purely incompressible. In the tutorial, the same material law employed by
both studies was used: the Mooney-Rivlin law with *c<sub>10</sub> = 0.293 MPa*,
*c<sub>01</sub> = 0.177 MPa*, and the bulk modulus *1410 MPa*. Note that this
material is much less stiff than the material assumed in the previous two
tutorials.

The domain used was only a quarter of the cylinder due to symmetry (hatched
area in Figure 1). A mesh with 500 quadrilateral control volumes arranged in a
block-structured mesh was simulated and the updated Lagrangian approach was
employed for the results shown below, indicated by the `solidModel`
`nonLinearGeometryUpdatedLagrangian`. The plate is linearly displaced in 30
increments.

---

## Expected results

Figure 2 shows the displacement of the mesh of the (a) undeformed
configuration, and an intermediate and final instants of the simulation (b and
c, respectively). Figure 3 shows the Von Mises stress field for the
intermediate and final configuration of the cylinder, where we can see that the
maximum stress occurs at the center of cylinder.

<img src="images/mesh-1.png" width="300" />
<img src="images/mesh-2.png" width="300" />
<img src="images/mesh-3.png" width="300" />

**Figure 2: Mesh of the undeformed configuration and the deformed mesh at a
intermediate and final instants of time.**

<img src="images/stress-2.png" width="400" />
<img src="images/stress-3.png" width="400" />

**Figure 3: Von Mises stress fields at the intermediate and final instants of
time.**

The verification of the solution given by `solids4Foam` can be seen in the
Figure 4 which shows the displacement force applied to the cylinder as a
function of the plate vertical displacement. The plot compares the numerical
solution by using the FEM solution provided by Bijelonja et al. (2005).

<img src="images/displacement-force.png" width="400" />

**Figure 4: Displacement force versus deflection of the cylinder with
`solid4Foam` and a reference solution using the FEM method published in
[Bijelonja et al. (2005)](https://hrcak.srce.hr/206941).**

Note from Figures 2 and 3 that the deformation of this case is quite large,
with the mesh being considerably deformed towards the later time-steps. It is
instructive in this tutorial to assess the impact of the updated and total
Lagrangian formulations on the convergence of the case. To that end, we first
ran this tutorial with the `nonLinearGeometryUpdatedLagrangian` (label UL) and,
then, `nonLinearGeometryTotalLagrangianTotalDisplacement` (labeled TLTD) and
`nonLinearGeometryTotalLagrangian` (label TL) that uses the total Lagrangian
formulation but with the total and incremental displacements, respectively. The
comparison is shown in Figure 5 with the residuals of the second and
last time-steps.

<img src="images/residuals-plot-dt2.png" width="400" />
<img src="images/residuals-plot-last-dt.png" width="400" />

 **Figure 5: Residuals of this tutorial using an updated and total Lagrangian
 approaches at the second (left panel) and last (right panel) time-steps.**

Note that there is a change in the best approach according to the instant in
time, although the total time of simulation was approximately the same. This
may also occur depending on the problem you simulating, so it might be
important to perform different tests with the problem you are handling to find
the optimal `solidModel`.

---

## Data Availability

The results and gnuplot scripts used to generate the figures above are
available in the [solids4foam tutorials benchmark
data](https://github.com/solids4foam/solids4foam-tutorials-benchmark-data)
repository.
