tutorials/fluids/cylinderInChannel/README.md, before:

---
sort: 2
---

# My second tutorial: `cylinderInChannel`

---

## Tutorial Aims

- Demonstrate how to perform a fluid-only analysis in solids4foam;
- Explain how a solids4foam fluid case differs from a standard OpenFOAM fluid case.

## Case Overview

![](images/flu_over_1.PNG)

This is the classic “flow over a cylinder in a channel” test case, as analysed by, for example, Ferziger and Peric (2002). The problem is modelled as 2-D. The inlet flow velocity profile is specified (coming in from the left), and the outlet (right) gauge pressure is zero. The upper wall, lower wall and cylinder are no-slip walls.

We assume an incompressible Newtonian isothermal laminar fluid, where the Navier-Stokes governing equations take the form:

![](images/flu_theo_1.PNG)

We will use the PIMPLE pressure-velocity coupling algorithm:
```pseudocode
for all time-steps
    do
        solve momentum equation for U (terms depending on p are calculated explicitly)
        solve pressure equation for p (terms depending on U are calculated explicitly)
    while not converged
end
```
---

## Expected Results

For Re = 100, the flow is expected to be unsteady, with vortices shedding from the cylinder.

![](images/flu_over_3.PNG)

---

## Running the Case

The tutorial case can be run using the included `Allrun` script, i.e. `> ./Allrun`. In this case, the `Allrun` script is
```bash
#!/bin/bash

# Source tutorial clean functions
. $WM_PROJECT_DIR/bin/tools/RunFunctions

# Source solids4Foam scripts
source solids4FoamScripts.sh

# Check case version is correct
solids4Foam::convertCaseFormat .

# Create the mesh
solids4Foam::runApplication fluentMeshToFoam cylinderInChannel.msh
solids4Foam::runApplication changeDictionary

# Run the solver
solids4Foam::runApplication solids4Foam

# Create plots
if command -v gnuplot &> /dev/null
then
    if [[ -f "./postProcessing/forces/0/forces.dat" ]]
    then
        echo "Generating force.pdf using gnuplot"
        gnuplot force.of9.gnuplot &> /dev/null
    else
        echo "Generating force.pdf using gnuplot"
        gnuplot force.gnuplot &> /dev/null
    fi
else
    echo "Please install gnuplot if you would like to generate the plots"
fi
```
where the `solids4Foam::convertCaseFormat .` script makes minor changes to the case to make it compatible with your version of OpenFOAM/foam-extend. As can be seen, the mesh in the fluent format is converted to the OpenFOAM format before running the `solids4Foam` solver. After the solver has finished, a `force.pdf` plot is generated if the `gnuplot` program is installed. 

```tip
Remmber that a tutorial case can be cleaned and reset using the included `Allrun` script, i.e. `> ./Allclean`.
```

---

## Analysing the Results

In the ParaView, a [von Kármán vortex street](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kármán_vortex_street) is clearly visible by viewing the pressure field `p`:
![](images/flu_run_1.PNG)


---

# Delving Deeper

---

If you would like to learn more about the case, then please continue; if not, how about you check out another tutorial.

---

## Case Structure

The case follows the typical `pimpleFoam` (or `pimpleDyMFoam`) case structure:

```
cylinderInChannel
├── 0
│   ├── U
│   └── p
├── Allclean
├── Allrun
├── constant
│   ├── RASProperties
│   ├── dynamicMeshDict
│   ├── fluidProperties
│   ├── physicsProperties
│   ├── polyMesh
│   │   └── …
│   ├── transportProperties
│   └── turbulenceProperties
├── cylinderInChannel.msh
└── system
    ├── changeDictionaryDict
    ├── controlDict
    ├── fvSchemes
    └── fvSolution
```
The only difference with a `pimpleFoam` case is that a `constant/physicsProperties` dictionary must be present, where the type of analysis is specified:
```
type     fluid;
//type   solid;
//type   fluidSolidInteraction;
```

In addition, as this is a "fluid" analysis, a `constant/fluidProperties` dictionary must also be present, where the PIMPLE algorithm for an incompressible isothermal fluid is specified:

```
fluidModel pimpleFluid;

pimpleFluidCoeffs
{}
```

```note
The `pimpleFluid` fluid model does not require any settings to be specified. Parameters related to the PIMPLE algorithm as instead specified in `system/fvSolution`, just like for the `pimpleFoam` solver.
```

Apart from specifying the `physicsProperties` and `fluidProperties` dictionaries, the case is equivalent to a standard `pimpleFOAM` case, e.g. in terms of `transportProperties`, `RASProperties`, `dynamicMeshDict`, `U`, `p`, `fvSchemes`, etc.

---

## Code

### `fluidModel`

For the `cylinderInChannel` test case, we have selected a “fluid” analysis in the `physicsProperties` dictionary: this means a `fluidModel` class will be selected; then, we specify the actual `solidModel` class to be the `pimpleFluid` class.

The code for the pimpleFluid class is located at:
```
solids4foam/src/solids4FoamModels/fluidModels/pimpleFluid/pimpleFluid.C
```
and this code directly ports the `pimpleFoam` solver code; in particular, see the `evolve()` function with `pimpleFluid.C`.

Commit message:

Link to tutorial files (featured tutorials) (#148)

tutorials/fluids/cylinderInChannel/README.md, after:

---
sort: 2
---

# My second tutorial: `cylinderInChannel`

You can find the files for this tutorial under [`tutorials/fluids/cylinderInChannel`](https://github.com/solids4foam/solids4foam/tree/master/tutorials/fluids/cylinderInChannel).

---

## Tutorial Aims

- Demonstrate how to perform a fluid-only analysis in solids4foam;
- Explain how a solids4foam fluid case differs from a standard OpenFOAM fluid case.

## Case Overview

![](images/flu_over_1.PNG)

This is the classic “flow over a cylinder in a channel” test case, as analysed by, for example, Ferziger and Peric (2002). The problem is modelled as 2-D. The inlet flow velocity profile is specified (coming in from the left), and the outlet (right) gauge pressure is zero. The upper wall, lower wall and cylinder are no-slip walls.

We assume an incompressible Newtonian isothermal laminar fluid, where the Navier-Stokes governing equations take the form:

![](images/flu_theo_1.PNG)

We will use the PIMPLE pressure-velocity coupling algorithm:
```pseudocode
for all time-steps
    do
        solve momentum equation for U (terms depending on p are calculated explicitly)
        solve pressure equation for p (terms depending on U are calculated explicitly)
    while not converged
end
```
---

## Expected Results

For Re = 100, the flow is expected to be unsteady, with vortices shedding from the cylinder.

![](images/flu_over_3.PNG)

---

## Running the Case

The tutorial case can be run using the included `Allrun` script, i.e. `> ./Allrun`. In this case, the `Allrun` script is
```bash
#!/bin/bash

# Source tutorial clean functions
. $WM_PROJECT_DIR/bin/tools/RunFunctions

# Source solids4Foam scripts
source solids4FoamScripts.sh

# Check case version is correct
solids4Foam::convertCaseFormat .

# Create the mesh
solids4Foam::runApplication fluentMeshToFoam cylinderInChannel.msh
solids4Foam::runApplication changeDictionary

# Run the solver
solids4Foam::runApplication solids4Foam

# Create plots
if command -v gnuplot &> /dev/null
then
    if [[ -f "./postProcessing/forces/0/forces.dat" ]]
    then
        echo "Generating force.pdf using gnuplot"
        gnuplot force.of9.gnuplot &> /dev/null
    else
        echo "Generating force.pdf using gnuplot"
        gnuplot force.gnuplot &> /dev/null
    fi
else
    echo "Please install gnuplot if you would like to generate the plots"
fi
```
where the `solids4Foam::convertCaseFormat .` script makes minor changes to the case to make it compatible with your version of OpenFOAM/foam-extend. As can be seen, the mesh in the fluent format is converted to the OpenFOAM format before running the `solids4Foam` solver. After the solver has finished, a `force.pdf` plot is generated if the `gnuplot` program is installed. 

```tip
Remmber that a tutorial case can be cleaned and reset using the included `Allrun` script, i.e. `> ./Allclean`.
```

---

## Analysing the Results

In the ParaView, a [von Kármán vortex street](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kármán_vortex_street) is clearly visible by viewing the pressure field `p`:
![](images/flu_run_1.PNG)


---

# Delving Deeper

---

If you would like to learn more about the case, then please continue; if not, how about you check out another tutorial.

---

## Case Structure

The case follows the typical `pimpleFoam` (or `pimpleDyMFoam`) case structure:

```
cylinderInChannel
├── 0
│   ├── U
│   └── p
├── Allclean
├── Allrun
├── constant
│   ├── RASProperties
│   ├── dynamicMeshDict
│   ├── fluidProperties
│   ├── physicsProperties
│   ├── polyMesh
│   │   └── …
│   ├── transportProperties
│   └── turbulenceProperties
├── cylinderInChannel.msh
└── system
    ├── changeDictionaryDict
    ├── controlDict
    ├── fvSchemes
    └── fvSolution
```
The only difference with a `pimpleFoam` case is that a `constant/physicsProperties` dictionary must be present, where the type of analysis is specified:
```
type     fluid;
//type   solid;
//type   fluidSolidInteraction;
```

In addition, as this is a "fluid" analysis, a `constant/fluidProperties` dictionary must also be present, where the PIMPLE algorithm for an incompressible isothermal fluid is specified:

```
fluidModel pimpleFluid;

pimpleFluidCoeffs
{}
```

```note
The `pimpleFluid` fluid model does not require any settings to be specified. Parameters related to the PIMPLE algorithm as instead specified in `system/fvSolution`, just like for the `pimpleFoam` solver.
```

Apart from specifying the `physicsProperties` and `fluidProperties` dictionaries, the case is equivalent to a standard `pimpleFOAM` case, e.g. in terms of `transportProperties`, `RASProperties`, `dynamicMeshDict`, `U`, `p`, `fvSchemes`, etc.

---

## Code

### `fluidModel`

For the `cylinderInChannel` test case, we have selected a “fluid” analysis in the `physicsProperties` dictionary: this means a `fluidModel` class will be selected; then, we specify the actual `solidModel` class to be the `pimpleFluid` class.

The code for the pimpleFluid class is located at:
```
solids4foam/src/solids4FoamModels/fluidModels/pimpleFluid/pimpleFluid.C
```
and this code directly ports the `pimpleFoam` solver code; in particular, see the `evolve()` function with `pimpleFluid.C`.
