---
sort: 2
---

# Tutorial: `cylindricalPressureVessel`

---

## Tutorial Aims

- Exemplify the use of a hyperelastic mechanical law with large deformations;
- Assess the effect of the bulk modulus on the residual convergence of
  segregated algorithms for solids.

```warning
This tutorial currently only works with foam-extend-4.1.
```

## Case Overview

<img src="images/cylindrical-pressure-vessel.png" width="400" />

**Figure 1: Thick cylindrical vessel under an inner pressure.**

This benchmark consists in a thick cylindrical shell with inner radius
*R<sub>i</sub> = 7 m* and outer radius *R<sub>o</sub> = 18.625 m*, with its
material modeled as incompressible with the Mooney-Rivlin law with material
parameters *c<sub>10</sub> = 80 MPa*, *c<sub>01</sub> = 20 MPa*, and
*c<sub>11</sub> = 0.0 MPa*. The strain state is assumed to be plane due to the
geometric symmetry along the z-axis direction (see Figure 1). For the
simulation, the inner pressure was linearly applied in equal increments along
time until *p = 100 MPa*.

Due to symmetry, only a quarter of the cylinder section was simulated with a
mesh density of 20 x 20 cells in the radial and circumferential directions,
created using the `blockMesh` utility, respectively. A residual tolerance for
the momentum equation of *10<sup>-6</sup>* was selected. For the results
presented here, we employed the
`nonLinearGeometryTotalLagrangianTotalDisplacement` model, one of the total
Lagrangian approaches available, that solves for the *total* of the
displacement, which is why you hav to use the `D` file in the directory `0/`.

---

## Expected Results

Figure 2 shows the radial and circumferential (or hoop stress) components of
the Cauchy stress tensor along the *undeformed* radius of the cylinder when the
inner pressure is equal to *100 MPa*. To solve for the underformed
configuration, i.e. without automatically moving the mesh, you have to use one
of the *total Lagrangian* formulations available. The solution reference was
found in [I. Bijelonja, I. Demirdžić, and S. Muzaferija, “A finite volume
method for large strain analysis of incompressible hyperelastic materials,”
International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, vol.  64, pp.
1594–1609, Nov.  2005](https://hrcak.srce.hr/206941)

![](images/radial-stress.png)
![](images/hoop-stress.png)

**Figure 2: Radial (left) and circunferential, or hoop, stresses (right) along
the radius of the cylinder.**

The results shown in the plots of Figure 2 were obtained with a Poisson ratio
of 0.49, which yielded a Jacobian in the interval *[0.98,0.99]* for the last
time-step. The Jacobian is the determinant of the deformation gradient (the `F`
field that you find in the solution of non-linear cases), and should be equal
to 1 when the solid is incompressible. As explained in the theoretical
documentation (LINK TO BE ADDED), the hyperelastic laws in `solids4foam` are
implemented using a *volumetric decomposition*, where the deviatoric and
volumetric portions of the constitutive law are modeled separately. In this
case, the volumetric portion represents the isochoric motion of the solid and
the compressibility of material can be set directly by using its bulk modulus
(the field `K` in `constant/mechanicalProperties`), if available, or through
the Poisson ratio (the scalar `nu` in `constant/mechanicalProperties`), where
thus the bulk modulus is computed via the equation of the linearized theory. 

By using this formulation, the purely incompressible behavior can be achieved
by making either the bulk modulus "too large" or the Poisson ratio closer to
0.5.  However, an important feature of displacement-based segregated solvers is
that the convergence deteriorates as the incompressible behavior is
approximated. To demostrate this, Figure 3 shows the residuals drop of the
first time step of the solution for four diferent values of the Poisson ratio,
`nu`: 0.30, 0.40, 0.45, and 0.49.

<img src="images/residuals-plot.png" width="400" />

**Figure 3: Effect on convergence when approximating the purely incompressible
behavior in a solid.**

It is important to have this in mind when using the non-linear mechanical laws
implemented.

---

## Data Availability

The results and gnuplot scripts used to generate the figures above are available in the [solids4foam tutorials benchmark data](https://github.com/solids4foam/solids4foam-tutorials-benchmark-data) repository.
