---
sort: 9
---

# Frictional sliding of an elastic cylinder segment: `slidingFrictionBall`

---

Prepared by Philip Cardiff and Ivan Batistić

---

## Tutorial Aims

- Demonstrate the analysis of a transient frictional contact problem.

---

## Case Overview

This case consists of an elastic cylindrical segment (the “ball”) that is
pressed into the top of an elastic block (Figure 1). The ball initially slides
over the block in the positive $$x$$ direction before switching direction and
sliding in the negative $$x$$ direction. Both bodies have the same material
properties: density $$\rho=7854 $$ kg/m$$^3$$, Young modulus $$E=200$$ GPa and
Poisson's radio $$\nu=0.3$$. The bottom surface of the elastic block is fixed
(zero displacement), whereas the top surface of the cylindrical segment has a
prescribed time-varying displacement:

$$
d_y = -0.1 \mathrm{~mm}, \qquad d_x = \begin{cases}2 t / 50 \mathrm{~cm}, &
\text { if } t \leq 50 \mathrm{~s} \\ 2(100-t) / 50 \mathrm{~cm}, & \text { if
} 50<t \leq 100 \mathrm{~s}\end{cases}
$$

where $$t$$ is the time. The case is solved using a 2-D model under the plane
strain assumption and without gravitational effects. Time is discretised using
100 equally spaced increments. At the contact interface, a frictional response
is considered, and the Coulomb coefficient of friction is set to 0.1.

![Figure 1: Problem geometry [1]](./images/slidingFrictionBall-geometry.png)

Figure 1: Problem geometry [1]

---

## Expected Results

The $$\sigma_{xy}$$ and $$\sigma_{eq}$$ fields at time $$t=30$$ and $$t=60$$ s
are shown in Figure 2, demonstrating the shear stress $$\sigma_{xy}$$ flips sign
after the sliding direction changes. The evolution of the $$\sigma_{xy}$$ and
$$\sigma_{eq}$$ fields in time are shown in Video 1.

![Figure 2: Sigma XY and sigma equivalent stress fields at 30 s and 60 s
[1].](./images/slidingFrictionBall-results.png)

Figure 2: Sigma XY and sigma equivalent stress fields at 30 s and 60 s [1].

{% include youtube.html id="UHCpYKMPhPw" %}

**Video 1: Evolution of the $$\sigma_{xy}$$ and $$\sigma_{eq}$$ fields during
sliding**

---

## Running the Case

The tutorial case is located at
`solids4foam/tutorials/solids/linearElasticity/slidingFrictionBall`. The case
can be run using the included `Allrun` script, i.e. `> ./Allrun`. In this case,
the Allrun consists of creating the mesh using `blockMesh` (`> blockMesh`)
followed by running the `solids4foam` solver (`> solids4Foam`).

```warning
The case is currently not working with the ORG version of OpenFOAM!
```

---

### References

[1]
[Philip Cardiff, solids4foam - Another solid mechanics tutorial frictional
sliding, PhD Interdoctoral Course at Politecnico di Milano, Computational Fluid
Dynamics with Open-Source Software, 2022.](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/358743700_2c_-_solids4foam_-_Another_solid_mechanics_tutorial_frictional_sliding_-_2022_-_Philip_Cardiff)
