---
sort: 5
---

# Contact patch test: `contactPatchTest`

---

Prepared by Ivan Batistić

---

## Tutorial Aims

- Demonstrate that a uniform pressure field can be transmitted across a
  non-conformal contact interface;
- Examine the solver performance when solving contact problems in small
  deformation settings.

---

## Case Overview

The contact patch test is designed to check can a uniform pressure field can be
transmitted across a non-conformal contact interface. There are different
versions of the patch test in the literature
[[1](https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/978-3-662-04864-1),
[2](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0045794901000487)];
here patch test proposed in
[[3]](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/%28SICI%291097-0207%2820000530%2948%3A3%3C435%3A%3AAID-NME891%3E3.0.CO%3B2-V)
is considered. The lower block is fixed at the bottom surface, whereas the upper
block has a prescribed displacement $$\Delta = 0.01$$ m at its top surface (see
Figure 1). Both blocks have the same dimensions, $$1$$ m width and $$0.5$$ m
height, and the same material properties, Young’s modulus $$E = 1 × 10^6$$ Pa
and zero Poisson’s ratio $$\nu = 0$$. Gravitation effects are neglected, and
there are no body forces. The problem is solved as static, using one loading
increment. At the contact interface, frictionless contact is considered, i.e.
$$\mu=0$$.

![Figure 1: Problem geometry (dimensions in m)
[4]](./images/contactPatchTest-geometry.png)

Figure 1 - Problem geometry (dimensions in m) [4]

---

## Expected Results

- Under plane strain conditions, the analytical solution to the problem is

[[1]](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/%28SICI%291097-0207%2820000530%2948%3A3%3C435%3A%3AAID-NME891%3E3.0.CO%3B2-V):
  $$
    \sigma_{x} = \tau_{xy}=0\qquad \sigma_{y} = \dfrac{E}{1-\nu^2}\Delta \qquad
\sigma_z = \nu \sigma_y.
  $$

For the considered case with $$\nu=0$$, there are no $$\sigma_x$$ and
$$\sigma_z$$ stresses. If one wants to set $$\nu > 0$$ the above equation can be
used only if the bottom surface of the lower block is allowed to deform freely
in the tangential direction. Here the bottom surface of the lower block is held
fixed as there is no displacement in the $$x$$ direction.

The analytical solution is generated alongside solution fields using the
function object compiled when running `>./Allrun` script. Function object inputs
are located in `controlDict` where one needs to upper block top surface
vertical displacement and material data:

```c++
functions
{
    analyticalSolution
    {
        type    contactPatchTestAnalyticalSolution;

        // Upper block top surface vertical displacement
        displacement   0.01;

        // Young's modulus
        E       1e6;

        // Poisson's ratio
        nu      0.0;
    }
}
```

Figure 2 shows the distribution of the relative error field $$e$$. The relative
error (in percentages) is defined as:

$$
e(\%)=\dfrac{\left| \sigma_y - \sigma_y^{analytical}
\right|}{\left|\sigma_y^{analytical}\right|} \cdot 100.
$$

One can see that the error distribution is uniform, meaning that the
`solidContact` boundary condition can correctly transmit a spatially uniform
pressure field across a flat non-conformal interface in complete contact.
Results for Fig. 2 are obtained using `foam-extend 4.1` and
`linearGeometryTotalDisplacement` solver, with the normal penalty scale set to
$$f_n^{scale}=5$$.

![Figure 2: Distribution of the relative
error](./images/contactPatchTest-relError.png)

Figure 2 - Distribution of the relative error

---

## Running the Case

The tutorial case is located at
`solids4foam/tutorials/solids/linearElasticity/contactPatchTest`. The case can
be run using the included `Allrun` script, i.e. `> ./Allrun`. In this case, the
Allrun consists of creating the mesh using `blockMesh` (`> blockMesh`) followed
by running the `solids4foam` solver (`> solids4Foam`).

---

### References

[1]
[Wriggers, P.. Computational contact mechanics. Vol. 2. Berlin: Springer,
2006.](https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/978-3-662-04864-1)

[2]
[N. El-Abbasi, K.J. Bathe, Stability and patch test performance of contact
discretizations and a new solution algorithm, Computers & Structures 79,
2001.](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0045794901000487)

[3]
[Crisfield MA. Re-visiting the contact patch test. Int J Numer Methods Eng.
2000](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/%28SICI%291097-0207%2820000530%2948%3A3%3C435%3A%3AAID-NME891%3E3.0.CO%3B2-V).

[4]
[Batistić I, Cardiff P, Ivanković A, Tuković Ž. A finite volume penalty-based
implicit procedure for the treatment of the frictionless contact boundaries.
Int J Numer Methods Eng. 2023](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/nme.7302)
