documentation/installation.md, before:

# **Installation**

The solids4foam toolbox can be installed using one of at least two methods:
- ### **natively**:  with a foam-extend-4.0 installation
- ### **docker**: (www.docker.com)
  - Docker Desktop & Docker Toolbox

Both methods for installing the solids4foam toolbox are explained here.

--------

## Installing solids4foam **natively**

- The latest version of solids4foam currently compiles with the foam-extend-4.0 and foam-extend-4.1 forks of OpenFOAM (in the future, it will work will all major versions). To install foam-extend-4.0 on your system, following instructions on the OpenFOAM wiki:
https://openfoamwiki.net/index.php/Installation/Linux/foam-extend-4.0

- To get access to the main development git repository, please email me(philip.cardiff@ucd.ie) with “solids4foam access” in the subject. solids4foam can be downloaded using git (it can be placed anywhere convenient):
```
$> cd $FOAM_RUN/..
$> git clone https://YOUR_USER_NAME@bitbucket.org/philip_cardiff/solids4foam-release.git solids4foam
```
- where ```YOUR_USER_NAME``` is your bitbucket username.

- Navigate into the downloaded solids4foam (or solids4foam-release) directory and run the included Allwmake script:
```
$> cd solids4foam-release
$> ./Allwmake
```

- Once the script finishes, solids4foam should be installed: check by running:
```
$> solids4Foam -help
```

- If everything was installed correctly, you should see the following output:
```
Usage: solids4Foam [-DebugSwitches key1=val1,key2=val2,...] [-DimensionedConstants key1=val1,key2=val2,...] [-InfoSwitches key1=val1,key2=val2,...] [-OptimisationSwitches key1=val1,key2=val2,...] [-Tolerances key1=val1,key2=val2,...] [-case dir] [-dumpControlSwitches] [-noFunctionObjects] [-parallel]  [-help] [-doc] [-srcDoc]
```

solids4Foam is now setup and ready to use!

---

  ## Installing solids4foam using **Docker**

Docker is like a light-weight virtual machine that can allow a Ubuntu linux installation of solids4foam to run on macOS, Windows or linux.
For macOS and Windows, Docker can be installed via **Docker Desktop** or **Docker Toolbox**: Docker Desktop is the preferred approach, while Docker Toolbox is for older Mac and Windows systems that do not meet the requirements of the Docker Desktop.

### **Docker Desktop (Preferred Approach)**

- Install Docker on your system by following the instructions for Windows/macOS/Linux on the Docker website: https://docs.docker.com/install/

  - Select Platform
  - Check System requirements
  - Select "Download from Docker Hub"
  - Select "Get Docker"
  - Complete installation

- Once installed, open a terminal (Powershell terminal on Windows), and pull the solids4foam docker image from Docker Hub (this requires internet connection and the image is ~6.2 GB, it may take a few minutes):
```
$> docker pull philippic/solids4foam-ubuntu18.04
```

- Create a solids4foam container (macOS and linux terminal):
```
$> docker run -itd -v="${HOME}":/home/app/foam/app-4.0/sharedRun --name solids4foam.ubuntu18.04  philippic/solids4foam-ubuntu18.04 /bin/bash
```
- Create a solids4foam container (Windows powershell terminal, where you first need to add your Windows home folder within the docker GUI under Resources -> file sharing -> press the + symbol -> add your home folder):
```
$> docker run -itd -v="${HOME}":/home/app/foam/app-4.0/sharedRun \--name solids4foam.ubuntu18.04 \ philippic/solids4foam-ubuntu18.04 /bin/bash
or (where yourHomeFolderName is replaced with your home folder name)
$> docker run -itd -v=c:/users/yourHomeFolderName:/home/app/foam/app-4.0/sharedRun \--name solids4foam.ubuntu18.04 \ philippic/solids4foam-ubuntu18.04 /bin/bash

```

- You can now attach to the newly created container:
```
$> docker attach solids4foam.ubuntu18.04
$> # you may need to press enter a second time to enter the docker environment
```
- Check the solids4Foam executable exists:
```
$> solids4Foam -help
```
- If everything was installed correctly, you should see the following output:
```
Usage: solids4Foam [-DebugSwitches key1=val1,key2=val2,...] [-DimensionedConstants key1=val1,key2=val2,...] [-InfoSwitches key1=val1,key2=val2,...] [-OptimisationSwitches key1=val1,key2=val2,...] [-Tolerances key1=val1,key2=val2,...] [-case dir] [-dumpControlSwitches] [-noFunctionObjects] [-parallel]  [-help] [-doc] [-srcDoc]
```

- solids4foam is now setup and ready to use! The solids4foam toolbox is installed at /home/app/foam/app-4.0/solids4foam. To exit and stop the docker container, type:
```
$> exit
$> docker stop solids4foam
```
- Note: it is straight-forward to install additional software in the Docker container, e.g.
```
$> sudo apt-get install emacs
```

- Note2: the shared directory points to the home directory in your host (actual) computer and in the docker container it is located at:
```
/home/app/foam/app-4.0/sharedDir
```

- Once exited, to re-attach to a container that has already been created, you can:
```
$> docker start solids4foam.ubuntu18.04
$> docker attach solids4foam.ubuntu18.04
```

### **Docker Toolbox**

- Install Docker on your system by following the instructions for Windows/macOS/Linux on the Docker website: https://docs.docker.com/toolbox/overview/

  - Select platform for toolbox installation on previous page linked, or follow one of the following links.

    - [Windows](https://docs.docker.com/toolbox/toolbox_install_windows/)
    - [Mac](https://docs.docker.com/toolbox/toolbox_install_mac/)

  - Follow 3 step installation

- Once installed, open a terminal (Docker terminal on Windows), and pull the solids4foam docker image from Docker Hub (this requires internet connection and the image is ~6.2 GB):
```
$> docker pull philippic/solids4foam-ubuntu18.04
```

- Create a solids4foam container (macOS and linux terminal):
```
$> docker run -itd -v="${HOME}":/home/app/foam/app-4.0/sharedRun --name solids4foam.ubuntu18.04  philippic/solids4foam-ubuntu18.04 /bin/bash
```
- Create a solids4foam container (Windows powershell terminal):
```
$> docker run -itd -v="${HOME}":/home/app/foam/app-4.0/sharedRun \--name solids4foam.ubuntu18.04 \ philippic/solids4foam-ubuntu18.04 /bin/bash
```

- You can now attach to the newly created container:
```
$> docker attach solids4foam.ubuntu18.04
$> # you may need to press enter a second time to enter the docker environment
```
- Check the solids4Foam executable exists:
```
$> solids4Foam -help
```
- If everything was installed correctly, you should see the following output:
```
Usage: solids4Foam [-DebugSwitches key1=val1,key2=val2,...] [-DimensionedConstants key1=val1,key2=val2,...] [-InfoSwitches key1=val1,key2=val2,...] [-OptimisationSwitches key1=val1,key2=val2,...] [-Tolerances key1=val1,key2=val2,...] [-case dir] [-dumpControlSwitches] [-noFunctionObjects] [-parallel]  [-help] [-doc] [-srcDoc]
```

- solids4foam is now setup and ready to use! The solids4foam toolbox is installed at /home/app/foam/app-4.0/solids4foam. To exit and stop the docker container, type:
```
$> exit
$> docker stop solids4foam
```
- Note: it is straight-forward to install additional software in the Docker container, e.g.
```
$> sudo apt-get install emacs
```

- Note2: the shared directory points to the home directory in your host (actual) computer and in the docker container it is located at:
```
/home/app/foam/app-4.0/sharedDir
```

- Once exited, to re-attach to a container that has already been created, you can:
```
$> docker start solids4foam.ubuntu18.04
$> docker attach solids4foam.ubuntu18.04
```
---

Commit message:

Minor update to the documentation

documentation/installation.md, after:

# Installation

The solids4foam toolbox can be installed using one of at least two methods:
- ### **natively**:  with a foam-extend-4.0 installation
- ### **docker**: (www.docker.com)
  - Docker Desktop & Docker Toolbox

Both methods for installing the solids4foam toolbox are explained here.

Automated scripts are provided to test the build as described further in [Test Scripts](../testScripts/testScripts.md).

--------

## Installing solids4foam **natively**

- The latest version of solids4foam currently compiles with foam-extend-4.0, foam-extend-4.1, OpenFOAM-v1812, OpenFOAM-v1912, and OpenFOAM-7.

- **Note**: currently all the tutorials only run with the foam-extend-4.0 and foam-extend-4.1 forks. For the other versions, some minor (or not so minor) changes to the tutorials are required: this is currently being addressed!

- One of these forks of OpenFOAM needs to be installed before installing solids4foam, e.g. to install foam-extend-4.0 on your system, following instructions on the OpenFOAM wiki:
https://openfoamwiki.net/index.php/Installation/Linux/foam-extend-4.0

- ~~To get access to the main development git repository, please email me(philip.cardiff@ucd.ie) with “solids4foam access” in the subject~~. The solids4foam bitbucket repository is now public, and solids4foam can be downloaded using git; it can be placed anywhere convenient:
```
$> cd $FOAM_RUN/..
$> git clone https://bitbucket.org/philip_cardiff/solids4foam-release.git
```

- To build, navigate into the downloaded solids4foam-release directory and run the included Allwmake script:
```
$> cd solids4foam-release
$> ./Allwmake
```

- Once the script finishes, solids4foam should be installed: check by running:
```
$> solids4Foam -help
```

- If everything was installed correctly, you should see the following output:
```
Usage: solids4Foam [-DebugSwitches key1=val1,key2=val2,...] [-DimensionedConstants key1=val1,key2=val2,...] [-InfoSwitches key1=val1,key2=val2,...] [-OptimisationSwitches key1=val1,key2=val2,...] [-Tolerances key1=val1,key2=val2,...] [-case dir] [-dumpControlSwitches] [-noFunctionObjects] [-parallel]  [-help] [-doc] [-srcDoc]
```

solids4Foam is now setup and ready to use!

---

  ## Installing solids4foam using **Docker**

Docker is like a light-weight virtual machine that can allow a Ubuntu (or other) linux installation of solids4foam to run on macOS, Windows or linux. For macOS and Windows, Docker can be installed via **Docker Desktop** or **Docker Toolbox**: Docker Desktop is the preferred approach, while Docker Toolbox is for older Mac and Windows systems that do not meet the requirements of the Docker Desktop.

### **Docker Desktop (Preferred Approach)**

- Install Docker on your system by following the instructions for Windows/macOS/Linux on the Docker website: https://docs.docker.com/install/

  - Select Platform
  - Check System requirements
  - Select "Download from Docker Hub"
  - Select "Get Docker"
  - Complete installation

- Once installed, open a terminal (Powershell terminal on Windows), and pull the solids4foam docker image from Docker Hub (this requires internet connection and the image is ~6.2 GB, it may take a few minutes):
```
$> docker pull philippic/solids4foam-ubuntu18.04
```

- Create a solids4foam container (macOS and linux terminal):
```
$> docker run -itd -v="${HOME}":/home/app/foam/app-4.0/sharedRun --name solids4foam.ubuntu18.04  philippic/solids4foam-ubuntu18.04 /bin/bash
```
- Create a solids4foam container (Windows powershell terminal, where you first need to add your Windows home folder within the docker GUI under Resources -> file sharing -> press the + symbol -> add your home folder):
```
$> docker run -itd -v="${HOME}":/home/app/foam/app-4.0/sharedRun \--name solids4foam.ubuntu18.04 \ philippic/solids4foam-ubuntu18.04 /bin/bash
or (where yourHomeFolderName is replaced with your home folder name)
$> docker run -itd -v=c:/users/yourHomeFolderName:/home/app/foam/app-4.0/sharedRun \--name solids4foam.ubuntu18.04 \ philippic/solids4foam-ubuntu18.04 /bin/bash

```

- You can now attach to the newly created container:
```
$> docker attach solids4foam.ubuntu18.04
$> # you may need to press enter a second time to enter the docker environment
```
- Check the solids4Foam executable exists:
```
$> solids4Foam -help
```
- If everything was installed correctly, you should see the following output:
```
Usage: solids4Foam [-DebugSwitches key1=val1,key2=val2,...] [-DimensionedConstants key1=val1,key2=val2,...] [-InfoSwitches key1=val1,key2=val2,...] [-OptimisationSwitches key1=val1,key2=val2,...] [-Tolerances key1=val1,key2=val2,...] [-case dir] [-dumpControlSwitches] [-noFunctionObjects] [-parallel]  [-help] [-doc] [-srcDoc]
```

- solids4foam is now setup and ready to use! The solids4foam toolbox is installed at /home/app/foam/app-4.0/solids4foam. To exit and stop the docker container, type:
```
$> exit
$> docker stop solids4foam
```
- Note: it is straight-forward to install additional software in the Docker container, e.g.
```
$> sudo apt-get install emacs
```

- Another Note: the shared directory points to the home directory in your host (actual) computer and in the docker container it is located at:
```
/home/app/foam/app-4.0/sharedDir
```

- Once exited, to re-attach to a container that has already been created, you can:
```
$> docker start solids4foam.ubuntu18.04
$> docker attach solids4foam.ubuntu18.04
```

### **Docker Toolbox**

- Install Docker on your system by following the instructions for Windows/macOS/Linux on the Docker website: https://docs.docker.com/toolbox/overview/

  - Select platform for toolbox installation on previous page linked, or follow one of the following links.

    - [Windows](https://docs.docker.com/toolbox/toolbox_install_windows/)
    - [Mac](https://docs.docker.com/toolbox/toolbox_install_mac/)

  - Follow 3 step installation

- Once installed, open a terminal (Docker terminal on Windows), and pull the solids4foam docker image from Docker Hub (this requires internet connection and the image is ~6.2 GB):
```
$> docker pull philippic/solids4foam-ubuntu18.04
```

- Create a solids4foam container (macOS and linux terminal):
```
$> docker run -itd -v="${HOME}":/home/app/foam/app-4.0/sharedRun --name solids4foam.ubuntu18.04  philippic/solids4foam-ubuntu18.04 /bin/bash
```
- Create a solids4foam container (Windows powershell terminal):
```
$> docker run -itd -v="${HOME}":/home/app/foam/app-4.0/sharedRun \--name solids4foam.ubuntu18.04 \ philippic/solids4foam-ubuntu18.04 /bin/bash
```

- You can now attach to the newly created container:
```
$> docker attach solids4foam.ubuntu18.04
$> # you may need to press enter a second time to enter the docker environment
```
- Check the solids4Foam executable exists:
```
$> solids4Foam -help
```
- If everything was installed correctly, you should see the following output:
```
Usage: solids4Foam [-DebugSwitches key1=val1,key2=val2,...] [-DimensionedConstants key1=val1,key2=val2,...] [-InfoSwitches key1=val1,key2=val2,...] [-OptimisationSwitches key1=val1,key2=val2,...] [-Tolerances key1=val1,key2=val2,...] [-case dir] [-dumpControlSwitches] [-noFunctionObjects] [-parallel]  [-help] [-doc] [-srcDoc]
```

- solids4foam is now setup and ready to use! The solids4foam toolbox is installed at /home/app/foam/app-4.0/solids4foam. To exit and stop the docker container, type:
```
$> exit
$> docker stop solids4foam
```
- Note: it is straight-forward to install additional software in the Docker container, e.g.
```
$> sudo apt-get install emacs
```

- Note2: the shared directory points to the home directory in your host (actual) computer and in the docker container it is located at:
```
/home/app/foam/app-4.0/sharedDir
```

- Once exited, to re-attach to a container that has already been created, you can:
```
$> docker start solids4foam.ubuntu18.04
$> docker attach solids4foam.ubuntu18.04
```
---
